JUDY WOODRUFF: It's been another
head-turning week in Washington,
from the Republican failure
on health care, to the
president's surprising
statement on transgender
military members,
and a flurry of profanity
from the new White
House communications
director and then, to
cap it off, today's announcement
from Mr. Trump that he is
changing his chief of staff.
Here to help make sense of
it all, Shields and Brooks.
That is syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
So, I thought we had a lot of
things to talk about, David,
before about an hour ago, when
we learned that the president
was changing his chief of staff.
Is this -- I guess we knew
that this might happen.
Reince Priebus has been in
trouble with this president,
we think, for a while, but what
do you think?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, he was never
given the chance to do the job.
Every other chief of staff
we have ever seen sort
of controls the schedule.
They control the tempo
in the White House.
They're the alter
ego of the president.
They are given some clear
sign of respect that they
speak for the president.
And Priebus never had that.
And so he was wounded
and stabbed before
Scaramucci came along.
He was stabbed like a pinata.
And so he was sort of a pathetic
figure hanging out there.
And so this doesn't come
as a total surprise, except
for maybe the timing.
As for General Kelly
taking the job, I sort of
question his sanity there.
He's been a loyalist, but I
really -- with all due respect
to the Marine Corps, I don't
see how someone who's been
trained in pretty orderly chain
of command is going to survive
this mess.
If he can control the
schedule, it will be one thing.
I just don't think that's
going to happen, given all the
independent power figures all
around him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you make
of it, Priebus out and Kelly in?
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, I am
continually amazed that it's not
simply a matter of human decency
or empathy when your boss is
firing anybody to make sure
that that person leaves and has
a soft landing, that
they can leave with their
self-respect, that they
can leave with someplace
to go to, with a plausible
explanation to their family
and friends that they weren't
humiliated, abused and derided.
This president treats staff
and others like a used sickness
bag on a bad airplane flight.
There's just absolutely no sense
of respect or decency shown,
so you humiliate somebody.
And for those who are
left, there is just a
sense of, could I be next?
It certainly doesn't
inspire loyalty.
As far as Kelly is
concerned, General Kelly
is a four-star general.
But I think David
put his finger on it.
He had a very distinguished
and honorable military career.
But he grew up in a
military structure.
He thrived up in a
As a chief of staff at
the White House, this is
a freelancing operation.
There's no chain of command.
There are all sorts of
people who go in and see
the president any time,
who are not accountable
to you or responsible.
And least of all, you have
a president who will even --
won't abide by any sense of a
chain of command or structure.
And I don't know that General
Kelly has any particular
political gifts or knowledge of
the legislative process or
dealings with the press.
So I'm not -- I know that
the president admires
him and the job he's
done at Homeland Security
and his career, but
I don't see the fit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we should
say that Reince Priebus, just
in the last few minutes, David,
put out a statement saying
it's been one of the greatest
honors of his life to serve this
president.
I guess that's what
one expects, maybe.
DAVID BROOKS: Gracious.
I'm not sure he would
pass a lie-detector test.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But one of the
things that's happening here
is that the president is moving
away from the Republican Party.
Priebus was a link to
the Republican Party.
The congressional
Republicans were -- had
some sort of relationship.
Jeff Sessions was a key to
the link between congressional
Republicans and Donald Trump,
and he's been under
assault in the most
humiliating way imaginable.
And so you're beginning to see
an administration - - I don't
know what party they're joining,
maybe the Bannon party, but
it's not the Republican Party.
And if you want to pass
legislation, you probably need
your allies on Capitol Hill.
If you want to survive
investigative committees,
you probably want some
friends in your party.
And this administration seems to
be moving the other direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In fact, you
look at the White House, and
Vice President Mike Pence, Mark,
may be the only person prominent
in the White House circle who
has any kind of Washington
experience.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, Judy.
And presidents thrive,
ideally, when they're both
loved and feared politically.
And Donald Trump is neither.
Nobody loves him
on Capitol Hill.
And he shows loyalty
is a one-way street.
He's not somebody who has
personal relationships
of any standing.
And the loyalty or disloyalty
that he shows to his people,
including Jeff Sessions, the
attorney general, who was just
humiliated, someone who was
with him early and strong,
at a time when no other senator
stood up for him, and remained
there through all the "Access
Hollywood" and the how to molest
and harass and sexually bar
the women tapes and so forth.
So, there isn't that, Judy.
That doesn't exist.
And David's absolutely right.
When you get in trouble, you
have got to have people who,
A, like you, believe in you and
are willing to go to some
political cost for you.
And we saw that on
the health care.
I mean, Donald Trump had about
as much influence on health care
as I had on the National League
pennant race.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, which
leads us to another - - I mean,
David, you said they have had a
struggle anything passed,
getting legislation passed.
This was a flame-out for them.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, this
was a bigger thing than
Donald Trump, though.
It was only one bill that lost.
It was four bills that lost.
And it wasn't only
a six-months effort.
It was a seven-year effort.
MARK SHIELDS: I agree.
DAVID BROOKS: And you
could say you could go
back to Newt Gingrich.
Think of all the ways the
Republicans have tried to trim
entitlements like Medicaid or
cut government.
Name a signal victory.
There's not a victory.
They haven't been able
to trim one agency, cut
back one entitlement.
They failed every single time.
And that suggests isn't
an electoral failure.
It's not a failure of whether
Mitch McConnell had the right
strategy or not, though that
was lamentable.
It's a failure of trying to
take things away from people.
People are under
assault from technology.
They're under assault from a
breakdown in social fabric,
breakdown in families.
They have got wage stagnations.
They just don't want a party
to come in and say, we're going
to take more away from you.
And so Republicans have to wrap
their minds around the fact that
the American people basically
decided that health care is
a right, and they figure,
we should get health care.
And our fellow countrymen
should get health care.
It doesn't mean you have to do
it the way the Democrats want
to do it with single-payer
or whatever.
You can do it with
market mechanisms.
But you have basically
got to wrap your mind
around universal coverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you
see what happened here, Mark?
And where do you see it
going on health care?
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, the yapping
dog, which was the Republican
Party, after chasing the
bus for seven years,
caught it and had no idea
what to do with the bus.
All you needed is that
final vote that Lisa
described so well, and
that is the final argument,
after seven years, after winning
three national elections where
that is your organizing issue,
we're going to repeal Obamacare,
came down to a single promise
and pledge to your fellow
Republicans from the leadership,
and that is, what you are
voting for, we promise will
not become law.
I mean, if you can
imagine anything, I mean,
that just said it all.
I mean, it was a
terrible performance.
The House voted on something
without even a congressional
budget scoring of it.
The Senate voted on something.
They didn't even have a
bill when they brought
it to the floor.
There was no legislation.
So, I mean, it was horrendous.
It was disappointing.
There were no ideas.
There was no will.
There was no imagination.
And there was
certainly no courage.
I don't blame Donald Trump, but
what was Donald Trump saying?
Donald Trump was saying he's
disappointed in the attorney
general because he wasn't
loyal to him.
That was his contribution to
the debate on health care as it
came to a vote in the Senate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you
think the prospects are, David,
that they are going to be able
to work with the Democrats, or
is that just something people
are saying that's never really
Going to happen?
DAVID BROOKS: I think that
there is a potential there.
If the Republicans get to the
point we're going to expand
coverage, let's talk about
how do it, I think you
could do some pretty
market-friendly reforms.
President Bush did it with
the prescription drug bill
a number of years ago.
But they're a long way
from that right now.
MARK SHIELDS: John McCain
does deserve, in my
judgment, a shout-out.
John McCain's vote, flying back,
kept it alive, kept the debate
alive, allowing the motion
to proceed.
And John McCain applied the
-- he gave the speech once he
had the whole audience there
of senators, and he told them
what they had done wrong, that
they all stood accused, that
their cheap partisanship
had replaced any kind
of sense of legislating.
And I really do think that
his vote -- we found out that
the testosterone level among
Republicans was limited
essentially to two members
whose names were Lisa and Susan.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And John
McCain joined that
want trio and showed, I
thought, real -- distinct
political courage, and
for the right reasons.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And some of the
Republican men in the House
of Representatives went after
those women, as
a matter of fact.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, Blake
Farenthold, a courageous
Aaron Burr would-be.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Aaron Burr.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It does
raise the question.
People are watching this,
David, and they have to be
asking, is anything going to get
done in our nation's capital,
with the White House in
some measure of chaos?
Yes, there have been some
changes, but where's the
-- you know, what are
people to look forward
to now?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I don't
think much is going to get done.
I don't think they're
going to do tax reform.
Tax reform is super hard.
It's potentially as hard or
harder than health care reform.
And it seems very unlikely
that that is going to get done.
And what hasn't happened is,
you don't have people waking
up thinking, how creatively
can I come up with some
piece of legislation that
will do somebody some good?
When I started covering
Congress in the 1980s, there
were a bunch of entrepreneurs.
Jack Kemp was there.
Bill Bradley would have
something on the gold standard.
There was a guy named
Jim Courter who always
had defense reform ideas.
And so you had start-ups in
the back rows of the House.
And then they would
finagle their way
through the committees.
Now you have very
few entrepreneurs.
You have few people
thinking creatively.
I rarely get e-mail.
I rarely calls.
There's a guy named Ro
Khanna from San Francisco
or from Palo Alto who
is a Democrat who thinks
this way.
But there is not as much
as entrepreneurship.
And the main cause is because
the leadership of the body has
taken control and destroyed
creativity throughout the ranks.
And that's a fault of both
Nancy Pelosi probably and Mitch
McConnell, who just centralized
everything.
And so the committee
system is broken and the
start-ups are broken.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
White House is having its
own share of problems.
We have alluded to this, Mark,
a lot of attention this week
about this profanity-laced phone
conversation that the new White
House communications director --
he hasn't actually taken the job
yet, but he's been named by
the president - - had with
a "New Yorker" reporter.
It seems that everywhere we
look, there is conflict, there
is screaming, there is discord.
You know, where do we see
hope and something positive?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, obviously
not in Shields and Brooks.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm
giving you a chance.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: "Mass
For Shut-Ins" is on, on
Sunday at 9:00, if people
want to hear a good
sermon.
No, I would say this,
Judy, that Anthony
Scaramucci is Donald Trump.
Every White House staff
to some degree inevitably
becomes a mirror reflection
of the candidate,
the president.
He is it.
And what he did, Donald Trump
approved of, the abusing of the
chief of staff, the abusing,
the denigration of
other leading members of
the White House staff.
I mean, and did Donald
Trump disapprove?
If you had a 14-year-old
daughter volunteering
on the Hill or a
14-year-old boy, I don't
care, and this is the
kind of language you get?
This is blood-curdling.
It's offensive and it's obscene.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You get
to defend him, David.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes,
it is offensable.
I'm from New York City.
Mark's from Boston.
And on behalf of eight
million New Yorkers, I want to
apologize for our language.
Scaramucci and Trump, I
just want to say that,
even though they're from
Queens and Long Island,
I'm pretty sure
they're Yankee fans.
They're not Mets fans.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: We
don't talk that way.
MARK SHIELDS: No, Mets fans.
DAVID BROOKS: No,
it's -- I agree.
Blood-curdling
would be the word.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I
gave you both a chance to
say something positive.
You didn't do it.
MARK SHIELDS: You're
wonderful, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Maybe we
will let you come back
and try again next week.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
Mark Shields, thank you both.